---
author: vitraag
comments: true
date: 2024-06-21T09:18:18Z
layout: post
slug: omacare 
title: Omacare
categories:
    - startups
---
I worked on presenting Omacare at the Rare Disease AI Hackathon organized by [Research To the People](https://www.researchtothepeople.org/) & Stanford Medicine. Following is a quick demo of the application and concept.

<iframe width="786" height="556" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/h6Zwi9SGWkY" title="Omacare" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Background
For last four years I've been a primary care giver for my Mom who suffered from a stroke and also have been part of care team for a care suffering from Glioblastoma. Care giving is a hard and lonely task and lots of this are missed in this continuum.

## What does Omacare do?
Omacare is dedicated to providing comprehensive support for individuals navigating various medical conditions. Our platform offers four key services designed to empower patients with information, community support, and financial assistance.

1. Support and Care Group Finder Find support and care groups for various medical conditions in specific locations.
    - Extensive database of support groups across multiple conditionsLocation-based
    - Location-based search for finding nearby groups
    - Virtual and in-person group optionsDetailed
    - Detailed information on meeting times, formats, and contact details
2. Patient Webinar Analysis Analyze patient webinars to extract key information, speakers, and topics discussed:
    - Comprehensive summaries of medical webinars
    - Identification of key speakers and their expertise
    - Highlight of main topics and takeaways
    - Access to archived webinar content and analysis
    - Medical Research Insights Get insights on medical research topics from the perspective of top researchers in the field:
3. Expert commentary on latest research developments
    - Interviews with leading researchers
    - Simplified explanations of complex medical studies
    - Regular updates on breakthrough discoveries
4. Financial Support and Grants Discover financial support and grant opportunities for medical conditions and assistance with applications:
    - Comprehensive database of medical grants and financial aid programs
    - Guidance on eligibility criteria and application processes
    - Assistance in preparing grant applications
    - Information on disease-specific financial support options

## How is it built?
Omacare enables access to Open AI, Claude and locally hosted Ollama models. It was built with nextjs, python and written from scratch with ability to score answers from different model like Dspy. Source code is public.

## What next?
Get support to enable it prototype for adoption by real patient communities.
